---
date: 2024-08-09T10:00:09+02:00
title: "On Randomness"
draft: false
omit_header_text: true
featured_image: "/images/file-size.jpg"
tags: ["Randomness", "History"]
categories: ["Writing"]
---

Iperborea is an italian publishing house founded by Emilia Lodigiani
in 1987 which aims to bring to Italian readers the literature of
northern Europe. Their books have a distinctive format and texture of
their covers making them instantly recognizable while browsing in a
bookstore. Not all of their titles are easy to find in English in
Italy so they are a good way for me to connect to Scandinavian culture
while also practicing my Italian. I read about the incredible Lake
Nyos disaster in Cameroon for example, in [Il Enigma del Lago
Rosso](https://iperborea.com/titolo/426/lenigma-del-lago-rosso/) by
Frank Westerman (translated from the Dutch); there is also an English
translation: [Choke
Valley](https://www.frankwesterman.nl/books/choke-valley).

I picked up *Orden som formade Sverige* by Elisabeth Åsbrink in
Italian at the Minerva bookstore in Trieste.  The literal translation
of the title is *The words that shaped Sweden* and has actually been
translated to English as *Made in Sweden: 25 ideas that created a
country* but I am reading it in Italian (*Made in Sweden: le parole
che hanno fatto la Svezia*).

The book consists of short chapters discussing some event of the
history of Sweden, centered around language or culture in some way,
ordered chronologically.  I found the style, pace and perspective in
each topic fascinating.

There is the amazing story mentioned in passing (in Chapter 1) of
runes inscribed in a marble sculpture of a lion once in the port of
Piraeus in Greece and now in the Arsenal in Venice. The text was
carved in the 11th century and is now so weathered down that reading
it is a huge challenge. Various reconstructions exist but whatever the
precise meaning it is clear that it is basically just like a modern
grafitti of the sort *X and his pals were here*, written by a bunch of
early Swedes far from home and with time to kill. I will come back to
runes in another post as they were important to me as a [kid]({{<
relref from-here-to-there >}}) via *Voyage to the Centre of the Earth*
of J. Verne .

But the main story for this post is in Chapter 6 about the Kalmar
Union. This is a major event in the history of Scandinavia of the late
1300's where the kingdoms of Denmark, Norway and Sweden were joined
under a single monarch. Erik Gustaf Geijer an early 1800's Swedish
writer, historian, composer famously said that the Kalmar Union was

*...an event that looks like an idea*.

I was struck by this because it sounds exactly what Darwin would say
about life. Life is a random event that looks intentional, like
someone, a conscious being, intended it, wanted it. Randomness that
looks like volition.

But then again this is hard for us humans. Our brain evolved to look
for patterns and extract meaning. A piece of marble in form of a lion
with carved symbols that look like a message in an unknown language
cannot just be random
([monkeys](https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/may/09/science.arts)
with a typewriter notwithstanding).

It is hard for us to understand what random means. A common exercise
in a lecture on probability is to divide the class in two and ask one
group to toss a coin 100 times recording the outcome and the other to
write down a made-up sequence of such tosses. Typically, it is later
easy to figure out which sequence came from the actual coin flips: the
one that includes strings of six heads in a row.

[Benford's Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benford's_law) is the
observation that in large data sets of unstructured numbers the
distribution of their first digits among $1,2,...,9$ is not actually
uniform but logarithmic. Concretely, the proportion of numbers in
the data set with a given first digit $d$ is roughly the length of the
interval $[\log(d),\log(d+1)]$.

The story of Benford's Law is interesting and starts with a paper by
Simon Newcomb in 1881:

{{< figure src="/images/newcomb.png" link="https://www.jstor.org/stable/2369148">}}

It was however F. Benford with his 1938 paper published in the *Proceedings of
the American Philosophical Society* (!)

{{< figure src="/images/benford-1938.png" link="https://www.jstor.org/stable/984802">}}

that really got people's attention and ended up with his name
associated with the phenomenon. Benford seems to have been unaware of
Newcomb’s paper.

Newcomb writes:

   *That the ten digits do not occur with equal frequency must be
evident to any one making much use of logarithmic tables, and noticing
how much faster the first pages wear out than the last ones. The first
significant figure is oftener 1 than any other digit, and the
frequency diminishes up to 9. The question naturally arises whether
the reverse would be true of logarithms.*

and gives the following table

{{< figure src="/images/newcomb-prob-table.png" >}}

(To me, Newcomb's is a beautiful example of being alert to and curious
of the unexpected while doing something totally unrelated.)

Benford's Law is important if you are trying to make a whole bunch of
numbers up. For example, if you are making up the cost of non-existent
expenses that you would like to claim your employer. Apparently, most
people make numbers up in ways they believe are random but that fail
miserably to follow Benford's Law (and this remains true even if you
convert the fake expenses to a different currency or change from base
ten to any other for that matter). Like thinking that 6 heads in a row
in 100 coin tosses cannot be random.

Conversely, the law is also useful if you suspect that a list of
numbers, again, say expenses from a long business trip, were
fabricated. Applying these distribution ideas is one of the tools of
what is known as *forensic accounting*, a mathematical component of
financial fraud detection.

In a different, more topical use, it was
[discovered](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0135169)
in a 2015 experiment that a small percentage of Twitter accounts in a
large sample (those with at least 100 friends) were actually bots. The
paper's author, the computer scientist Jennifer Golbeck, checked
whether the number of friends of the friends of the sampled account
followed Benford's Law. Most did, the bots did not.

For fun while writing this I did the following test. I took the size
of the around 250 files and sub-folders in my laptop's Documents
folder and computed the frequency of their first digits. Plotted
against Benford's prediction gives this

{{< figure src="/images/file-size.jpg" >}}

That's a pretty decent agreement.

At the time I learned about Benford's Law my youngest daughter Lula
had to present a project for the Science Fair at her school in
Austin. It was in fact the last such project for either of my
kids. Malena was already in middle-school and Lula was in the last
year of elementary school.

My kids had never done well at Science Fair projects. I always felt
that it was one important american cultural marker that I failed to
engage with. Typically, parents, mostly fathers it would seem, work
intensely with their kids on their projects and these become pretty
competitive affairs.

I suggested Lula that she collected data from family friends, teachers
and neighbors asking them to produce digits in three different
ways. First, by asking them the town or country where one of their
grandparents was born, from which we then recorded the first digit of
its current population. Second, by choosing a digit at random. And
third, by spinning a wheel divided into 9 sectors and labeled 1 to 9.
The contrast in the results were quite striking even in the small
sample she collected and the population first digits followed
Benford's Law quite well.

We saved the family honor. Lula's project got a 1st place purple
ribbon and was selected to participate at the city level competition
(but that was as far as things went).
